UW-432 (#373)
ufs-community/workflow-tools: docs/sections/user_guide/cli/mode_config.rst

Examples
~~~~~~~~

> The examples that follow use YAML file ``values.yaml`` with content

Author: Good point - got it!

> The examples that follow use YAML file ``values.yaml`` with content

Reviewer: While this specific case seems harmless, I wonder whether ([UW-419](https://jira.epic.oarcloud.noaa.gov/browse/UW-419) again, <sigh>) we even want to support this long-term. For example, how should we compare `config.yaml`
```
values:
  foo: 88
```
to `config.ini`
```
[values]
foo: 88
```
? In the YAML file, `foo` has an integer value; in the INI file, it's... a string? It has to be a string because **all** INI values are string, but is it _meant_ to represent an integer? Is it the same as or different from `foo` in the YAML file?

It might be best to avoid the issue for now and just do e.g. a YAML-to-YAML comparison (I wouldn't mind seeing a little more depth in the YAML tree, perhaps seeing how an entire missing _subtree_ is reported).

@christinaholtNOAA would a NML-to-NML comparison be useful?

  .. code:: sh

    $ uw config compare --file-1-path values.txt --file-2-path values.nml
    Cannot deduce format of 'values.txt' from unknown extension 'txt'

  In this case, the format can be explicitly specified:

  .. code:: sh

    $ uw config compare --file-1-path values.txt --file-1-format yaml --file-2-path values.nml
    [2024-01-03T16:33:19]     INFO - values.txt
    [2024-01-03T16:33:19]     INFO + values.nml
    [2024-01-03T16:33:19]     INFO ---------------------------------------------------------------------
    [2024-01-03T16:33:19]     INFO values:       recipient:  - None + World

* Request verbose log output:

  .. code:: sh

    $ uw config compare --file-1-path values.yaml --file-2-path values.nml --verbose
    [2024-01-03T16:25:47]    DEBUG Command: uw config compare --file-1-path values.yaml --file-2-path values.nml --verbose
    [2024-01-03T16:25:47]     INFO - values.yaml
    [2024-01-03T16:25:47]     INFO + values.nml
    [2024-01-03T16:25:47]     INFO ---------------------------------------------------------------------
    [2024-01-03T16:25:47]     INFO values:       recipient:  - None + World

>   Note that ``uw`` logs to ``stderr`` and writes non-log output to ``stdout``, so the streams can be redirected separately:

Author: Thanks - I modified this to only describe `stderr` redirect, I don't think there's any value in `stdout` here

  .. code:: sh

    $ uw config compare --file-1-path values.yaml --file-2-path values.nml --verbose 2>compare.log

>   The content of ``realized.log``:

Author: Ah, the faults of templating - thanks, got it!

Examples
~~~~~~~~

> TBD

Reviewer 2: There seems to be a missing example of using multiple supplemental files.

Author: OK, I think I've got it with this version, including emphasizing the precedence of overriding - thanks for keeping on me to improve the example!

  .. code:: sh

    $ uw config realize --input-file values.yaml --output-format yaml --values-needed
    [2024-01-05T11:34:22]     INFO Keys that are complete:
    [2024-01-05T11:34:22]     INFO     values
    [2024-01-05T11:34:22]     INFO     values.greeting
    [2024-01-05T11:34:22]     INFO     values.recipient
    [2024-01-05T11:34:22]     INFO     values.message
    [2024-01-05T11:34:22]     INFO     values.repeat
    [2024-01-05T11:34:22]     INFO 
    [2024-01-05T11:34:22]     INFO Keys that have unfilled Jinja2 templates:
    [2024-01-05T11:34:22]     INFO     values.date: {{ yyyymmdd }}
    [2024-01-05T11:34:22]     INFO 
    [2024-01-05T11:34:22]     INFO Keys that are set to empty:
    [2024-01-05T11:34:22]     INFO     values.empty

* To realize the config to ``stdout``, a target output format must be explicitly specified:

  .. code:: sh

    $ uw config realize --input-file values.yaml --output-format yaml
    values:
      greeting: Hello
      recipient: World
      message: Hello World
      date: '{{ yyyymmdd }}'
      repeat: 1
      empty: null

  Shell redirection via ``|``, ``>``, et al may also be used to stream output to a file, another process, etc.

> * Existing values can be overwritten and Jinja2 variables can be filled in by appending supplemental files to the end of the argument:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Values in the primary input file can be overridden via one or more supplemental files specified as positional arguments, each overriding the last; or by environment variables, which have the highest precedence.
```
Then maybe show something like
```
% recipient=Sun uw config realize --input-file values.yaml --output-format yaml config.yaml 
values:
  greeting: Good Night
  recipient: Moon
  message: Good Night SunGood Night Sun
  repeat: 2
```
That introduces the use of environment variables.

Author: Ah, good point! Got it added, thank you!

  .. code:: sh

    $ recipient=Sun uw config realize --input-file values.yaml --output-format yaml config.yaml 
    values:
      greeting: Good Night
      recipient: Moon
      message: Good Night SunGood Night Sun

>       date: 20240105

Reviewer 2: `date` was empty in the example `config.yaml` above, and not provided as an env var here.

Author: Ah thanks - this is a typo at line 197, as the date is updated by `config.yaml` elsewhere

      repeat: 2
      empty: null

* Realize the config to a file via command-line argument:

  .. code:: sh

    $ uw config realize --input-file values.yaml --output-file realized.yaml config.yaml

  The content of ``realized.yaml``:

  .. code:: sh

    values:
      greeting: Good Night
      recipient: Moon
      message: Good Night MoonGood Night Moon
      date: 20240105
      repeat: 2
      empty: null

* With the ``--dry-run`` flag specified, nothing is written to ``stdout`` (or to a file if ``--output-file`` is specified), but a report of what would have been written is logged to ``stderr``:

  .. code:: sh

    $ uw config realize --input-file values.yaml --output-file realized.yaml --dry-run config.yaml
    [2024-01-05T11:35:20]     INFO values:
    values:
      greeting: Good Night
      recipient: Moon

>       message: Good Night MoonGood Night Moon

Reviewer: nitpick: I think the run-on text without a space where one would expect one between the two copies of the greeting makes this seem like a somewhat tortured example. Like, who would want that? I just tried and wasn't readily able to get a space in there -- I tried piping into `| join(" ")` but that just put a space between each character -- probably a list of two strings is needed here but I don't know how to get one and Jinja2 isn't making it easy.

I **do** like that this examples shows the use of Jinja2 beyond the simplest variable interpolation, and don't want to use that, or else I'd suggest removing the `repeat`. But since this `Good Night MoonGood Night Moon` is now repeated so many times on this page, I feel like we should try for a strong Jinja2 example that doesn't produce output that looks like a bug. I don't immediately have a suggestion, unfortunately.

Author: I could make the `message` formula `'{{ (greeting + " " + recipient + " ") * repeat` just to add an extra space

Examples
~~~~~~~~

The examples that follow use YAML file ``values.yaml`` with content

.. code:: sh

  values:
    greeting: Hello

>     recipient: World

Author: I really thought about this but Jinja templating is involved enough that it should have its own documentation. I could probably modify it to present another error type or 2 if that would help

>     recipient: World

Reviewer 2: I think `realizing` a config is exactly where it should be described. That's where we fill in those jinja templates and then overwrite values provided by supplemental files. Both of those actions should be documented here in a way that shows what is actually happening. Otherwise `realizing` is only copying one file format to another, which is something we're discussing taking away.

>     recipient: World

Author: Ah thanks I misunderstood, I was thinking about `translate` for some reason - working on it!

>     recipient: World

Author: Hm, this version is still kind of simplistic but a little better - let me know if you think its still too short

>     recipient: World

Reviewer 2: I'd like to see that some of those Jinja2 templates are filled in for a completely realized output. It probably makes things too SRW-specific to use this example, but check out Slide 17 in [this slide deck](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1GziWguL2ivZo-VlgPcZi13bxcNvJ1fwJZKMwGixYrQQ/edit#slide=id.g1a118e06cb4_0_18).

>     recipient: World

Author: Sure, I can fill in some of the examples in a less-SRW-y way. You're right that it really should show full rendering

>     recipient: World

Author: What do you think of this:
`values.yaml`
```
values:
  greeting: Hello
  recipient: World
  message: '{{ (GREETING + RECIPIENT) * REPEAT }}'
  repeat: 1
```
`config.yaml`
```
values:
  greeting = Good Night
  recipient = Moon
  repeat: 2
```
However, its not rendering when I run `realize`

>     recipient: World

Author: Ah, case-sensitivity fixes it - will add shortly!

* Show the values needed to realize the config file to YAML:

  .. code:: sh

    $ uw config realize --input-file values.yaml --output-format yaml --values-needed
    [2024-01-03T15:35:29]     INFO Keys that are complete:
    [2024-01-03T15:35:29]     INFO     values
    [2024-01-03T15:35:29]     INFO     values.greeting
    [2024-01-03T15:35:29]     INFO     values.recipient
    [2024-01-03T15:35:29]     INFO 
    [2024-01-03T15:35:29]     INFO Keys that have unfilled Jinja2 templates:
    [2024-01-03T15:35:29]     INFO 

>     [2024-01-03T15:35:29]     INFO Keys that are set to empty:

Author: Agreed - as below, there are definitely some changes we can add

* To realize the config to ``stdout``, a target output format must be explicitly specified:

  .. code:: sh

    $ uw config realize --input-file values.yaml --output-format yaml
    values:
      greeting: Hello
      recipient: World

  Shell redirection via ``|``, ``>``, et al may also be used to stream output to a file, another process, etc.

* Realize the config to a file via command-line argument:

  .. code:: sh

    $ uw config realize --input-file values.yaml --output-file realized.yaml

  The content of ``realized.yaml``:

  .. code:: sh

      values:
        greeting: Hello
        recipient: World

* With the ``--dry-run`` flag specified, nothing is written to ``stdout`` (or to a file if ``--output-file`` is specified), but a report of what would have been written is logged to ``stderr``:

  .. code:: sh

    $ uw config realize --input-file values.yaml --output-file realized.yaml --dry-run
    [2024-01-03T15:39:23]     INFO values:
      greeting: Hello

>       recipient: World

Author: Thanks - agreed, it could certainly use more verbosity

Examples
~~~~~~~~

The examples that follow use atparse-formatted template file ``atparse.txt`` with content

.. code:: sh

>   @[greeting], @[recipient]!

Reviewer: For some reason, this block is not showing up for me in the preview HTML docs.

Author: Ah, I thought I caught all the missing `.. code::` line breaks, thanks!

* Convert an atparse-formatted template file to Jinja2 format:

  .. code:: sh

>     $ uw config translate --input-file atparse.txt --input-format atparse --output-format jinja2

Author: I was pondering that a bit - the cleaner UX is to default it and check at runtime, though requiring it could have an argument for reinforcing user awareness

>     $ uw config translate --input-file atparse.txt --input-format atparse --output-format jinja2

Reviewer: Will `uw config translate` ever do anything but atparse -> Jinja2 translation? If so, I think we should keep things as they are so that we won't have to break backward-compatibility when we add another capability. It seems possible that some other kind of translation might be desired in the future, though [UW-410](https://jira.epic.oarcloud.noaa.gov/browse/UW-419) concerns might limit what we can do.

If we'll _never_ do anything but atparse -> Jinja2, maybe the submode has too general a name. I can't think of anything I like at the moment. `uw config atparse-to-jinja2` is kind of awful, if clear.

>     $ uw config translate --input-file atparse.txt --input-format atparse --output-format jinja2

Reviewer 2: I think it could be 6 of one....leaving it as-is would be fine. Just felt sort of verbose since that's the only thing it does and we don't have plans to expand it.

>     $ uw config translate --input-file atparse.txt --input-format atparse --output-format jinja2

Author: Gosh I hope not - I think `translate` is sufficient, but I think we're in agreement that locking out the formats is a good refactor?

>     $ uw config translate --input-file atparse.txt --input-format atparse --output-format jinja2

Reviewer: I'd vote for opening a Jira ticket describing the proposal, and we can discuss / define acceptance criteria / pull into a sprint during some near-future sprint planning.

>     $ uw config translate --input-file atparse.txt --input-format atparse --output-format jinja2

Author: Opened as UW-472

    {{greeting}}, {{recipient}}!

  Shell redirection via ``|``, ``>``, et al may also be used to stream output to a file, another process, etc.

* Convert the template to a file via command-line argument:

  .. code:: sh

>     $ uw config realize --input-file values.yaml --output-file realized.yaml

Reviewer: This is a `realize`, not `translate`, command.

  The content of ``jinja2.txt``:

  .. code:: sh

    {{greeting}}, {{recipient}}!

* With the ``--dry-run`` flag specified, nothing is written to ``stdout`` (or to a file if ``--output-file`` is specified), but a report of what would have been written is logged to ``stderr``:

  .. code:: sh

    $ uw config translate --input-file atparse.txt --input-format atparse --output-format jinja2 --dry-run
    [2024-01-03T16:41:13]     INFO {{greeting}}, {{recipient}}!

> * If an input file is read alone from ``stdin``, ``uw`` know how to parse its content as we must always specify the formats:

Reviewer: `know how` -> `will not know how` ? Maybe
> If the input is read from `stdin`, `uw` will not know how to parse it, so the format must be specified:

? Also, it's not necessarily a "file" that's being read -- it could be the output of another process. Though it obviously is a file in this example, it's easy enough to not mention it.

Author: Ah, missed that, I think I've cleaned it up

  .. code:: sh

    $ cat atparse.txt | uw config translate --input-format atparse --output-format jinja2
    {{greeting}}, {{recipient}}!

* Request verbose log output:

  .. code:: sh

    $ uw config translate --input-file atparse.txt --input-format atparse --output-format jinja2 --verbose

>     {{greeting}}, {{recipient}}!

Reviewer: Do we really not get any log lines with `--verbose`? If not, IMO we might as well remove this bullet, as it doesn't really demonstrate anything.

Author: Yeah, or with validate. Both should probably either add more info or remove quiet/verbose. The `--quiet` isn't mentioned here or there because its even more useless

.. code:: sh

  {
    "$schema": "http://json-schema.org/draft-07/schema#",
    "type": "object",
    "properties": {
      "values": {
        "type": "object",
        "properties": {
          "greeting": {
            "type": "string"
          },
          "recipient": {
            "type": "string"
          }
        },
        "required": ["greeting", "recipient"],
        "additionalProperties": false
      }
    },
    "required": ["values"],
    "additionalProperties": false
  }

and YAML file ``values.yaml`` with content

.. code:: sh

  values:
    greeting: Hello
    recipient: World

* Validate a YAML config against a given JSON schema:

  .. code:: sh

    $ uw config validate --schema-file schema.jsonschema --input-file values.yaml
    [2024-01-03T17:23:07]     INFO 0 schema-validation errors found

  Shell redirection via ``|``, ``>``, et al may also be used to stream output to a file, another process, etc.

* Read the config from ``stdin`` and print validation results to ``stdout``:

  .. code:: sh

    $ cat values.yaml | uw config validate --schema-file schema.jsonschema
    [2024-01-03T17:26:29]     INFO 0 schema-validation errors found

> * However, reading the schema from ``stdin`` is not supported:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* However, reading the schema from ``stdin`` is **not** supported:
```

    [2024-01-03T17:31:19]    ERROR      'required': ['greeting', 'recipient'],
    [2024-01-03T17:31:19]    ERROR      'type': 'object'}
    [2024-01-03T17:31:19]    ERROR 
    [2024-01-03T17:31:19]    ERROR On instance['values']:
    [2024-01-03T17:31:19]    ERROR     {'greeting': 'Hello'}

* Request verbose log output:

  .. code:: sh

    $ uw config validate --schema-file schema.jsonschema --input-file values.yaml --verbose
    [2024-01-03T17:29:46]    DEBUG Command: uw config validate --schema-file schema.jsonschema --input-file values.yaml --verbose
    [2024-01-03T17:29:46]    DEBUG Dereferencing, initial value: {'values': {'greeting': 'Hello', 'recipient': 'World'}}
    [2024-01-03T17:29:46]    DEBUG Rendering: {'values': {'greeting': 'Hello', 'recipient': 'World'}}
    [2024-01-03T17:29:46]    DEBUG Rendering: {'greeting': 'Hello', 'recipient': 'World'}
    [2024-01-03T17:29:46]    DEBUG Rendering: Hello
    [2024-01-03T17:29:46]    DEBUG Rendering: World
    [2024-01-03T17:29:46]    DEBUG Dereferencing, final value: {'values': {'greeting': 'Hello', 'recipient': 'World'}}
    [2024-01-03T17:29:46]     INFO 0 schema-validation errors found

>   Note that ``uw`` logs to ``stderr`` and writes non-log output to ``stdout``, so the streams can be redirected separately:

Reviewer 2: This may not be relevant since `uw config validate` doesn't really print anything to `stdout`.

Examples
~~~~~~~~

The examples that follow use JSON Schema file ``schema.jsonschema`` with content

> .. code:: sh

Reviewer: This block is also not rendering to HTML as far as I can tell.

Reviewer: Also looks good now, thanks again.

> .. code:: sh

Reviewer: This code block might render better as `json` instead of `sh`. (I've got a branch that I'll PR after this one merges that updates the language-highlighting hints in various places, so I'll get this one if you don't.)

Author: Indeed it does, thanks!

  {
    "$schema": "http://json-schema.org/draft-07/schema#",
    "type": "object",
    "properties": {
      "values": {
        "type": "object",
        "properties": {
          "greeting": {
            "type": "string"
          },
          "recipient": {
            "type": "string"
          }
        },
        "required": ["greeting", "recipient"],
        "additionalProperties": false
      }
    },
    "required": ["values"],
    "additionalProperties": false
  }

and YAML file ``values.yaml`` with content

.. code:: sh

  values:
    greeting: Hello
    recipient: World

* Validate a YAML config against a given JSON schema:

  .. code:: sh

    $ uw config validate --schema-file schema.jsonschema --input-file values.yaml

>     [2024-01-03T17:23:07]     INFO 0 schema-validation errors found

Author: Yep, thanks!

  Shell redirection via ``|``, ``>``, et al may also be used to stream output to a file, another process, etc.

> * Read the config from ``stdin`` and render to ``stdout``:

Reviewer: Here and below, there's no "render"ing happening -- this is validation.

  .. code:: sh

    $ cat values.yaml | uw config validate --schema-file schema.jsonschema
    [2024-01-03T17:26:29]     INFO 0 schema-validation errors found

> * However, you cannot read the schema from ``stdin`` and render to ``stdout``:

Reviewer: As a general rule for documentation -- or at least as a style guideline for `uwtools` -- I'd recommend avoiding pronouns like "we", "you", etc. It's more straightforward to just describe the software and what it does. There may be more room for pronouns in the breezier style of an intro page, but in the drier technical docs, I personally find it distracting. This is just my opinion, though, so I'd like to hear what others think.

For example, this could read
> However, reading the schema from `stdin` is not supported:

(I left out the "render" part, as this is "validate" mode.)

There's another "you" in the `realize` section that could go if we agree on this style point.

Author: Bad conversational habit drifting in, thanks for catching that. I've fixed both entries I think

Reviewer 2: Hmmmm. I typically write in a similar conversational style. In a few places in my work-in-progress, I've made a change to remove the pronouns, but what about:

> We recommend a descriptive one to make it easier to read.

Here, I feel like it makes sense to keep it a bit more personal. Thoughts?

Reviewer: I don't think "we recommend" adds anything over
> A descriptive [thing] is easier to read.

Good advice doesn't need to be softened. We're all adults here. That "we" recommend an idea isn't what makes it good. The facts should be persuasive on their own.

Setting aside that I don't know the context to be more specific than "thing", in general that sentence sounds weak to me -- "one" and "it" are vague, even if the context clarifies what they refer to. For example, instead of writing (I'm just making this up)
> You can define a variable here to frobnicate the foo. We recommend a descriptive one to make it easier to read.

could be

> Define a variable to frobnicate the foo. A descriptive variable name will clarify its intent to readers.

A strong statement followed by clear rationale. Or even just

> Define a descriptively named variable to frobnicate the foo.

Do we need to explain why descriptive variables are desirable? Attention is a scarce resource and, when I'm the reader, I appreciate documentation that gets to the point.

That said, I think "We" can still be appropriate if substituting the "The UW Team" or "The UFS Community" or whatever is really what we mean and the context is clear. That's different, though, from e.g. "We see no output when we use the `--quiet` flag" (who is "we"?), which can be stated more strongly/directly as "The `--quiet` flag suppresses all output".

Reviewer 2: Point taken...with a few laughs thrown in for good measure. "Frobnicate the foo"?!? 😆

Reviewer: https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/frobnicate

Reviewer 2: TIL.

  .. code:: sh

    $ cat schema.jsonschema | uw config validate -input-file values.yaml
    uw config validate: error: the following arguments are required: --schema-file

> * If there are differences between the config files, they will be shown with the schema. For example, with ``recipient: World`` removed from ``values.yaml``:

Reviewer: Maybe this needs an update after copy/paste? This isn't about "differences between the config files", it's about a config failing validation.

Examples
~~~~~~~~

> The examples that follow use JSON Schema file ``schema.jsonschema`` with content

Reviewer 2: It would probably be good to put a link to the schema docs here.

> The examples that follow use `JSON Schema <https://json-schema.org/understanding-json-schema/reference>`_ file ``schema.jsonschema`` with content

Reviewer: We have an external link defined for JSON schema already, and can re-use it here either as a link to the main site as
```
:json-schema:`JSON Schema<>`
```
or to the specific page you're linking to here as
```
:json-schema:`JSON Schema<understanding-json-schema/reference>`
```

Author: Thanks, I had a feeling I was not doing that right

  }

and YAML file ``values.yaml`` with content

.. code:: sh

  values:
    greeting: Hello
    recipient: World

* Validate a YAML config against a given JSON schema:

  .. code:: sh

    $ uw config validate --schema-file schema.jsonschema --input-file values.yaml
    [2024-01-03T17:23:07]     INFO 0 UW schema-validation errors found

  Shell redirection via ``|``, ``>``, et al may also be used to stream output to a file, another process, etc.

* Read the config from ``stdin`` and print validation results to ``stdout``:

  .. code:: sh

    $ cat values.yaml | uw config validate --schema-file schema.jsonschema
    [2024-01-03T17:26:29]     INFO 0 UW schema-validation errors found

* However, reading the schema from ``stdin`` is **not** supported:

  .. code:: sh

    $ cat schema.jsonschema | uw config validate --input-file values.yaml
    uw config validate: error: the following arguments are required: --schema-file

* If a config fails validation, differences from the schema will be displayed. For example, with ``recipient: World`` removed from ``values.yaml``:

  .. code:: sh

    $ uw config validate --schema-file schema.jsonschema --input-file values.yaml

>     [2024-01-03T17:31:19]    ERROR 1 schema-validation error found

Reviewer 2: Does this also change to `UW schema-validation...`? How about the rest of the ones below?

Author: Oops, missed that one - I'll fix it and recheck the full set
